Welcome to this new installment in this series of videos about the world of
finance that we're making in collaboration with value school, Hey, by the way,
their website is now available in English.
I'll leave the link here in case you want to learn a little bit more about this
project value school, but having said that let's get.
[Inaudible].
Friends.
I don't think it's too hard for me to convince you that Harley Davidson is the
largest motorcycle manufacturer in the United States.
And one of the most legendary and iconic brands in the American economy.
Today.
Just in the United States.
According to the popular ranking made by the consultancy firm into brands on
brand valuation,
Harley-Davidson remains one of the 100 most valuable brands in the us.
Well.
Nick engine noise firing from its pistons and it's iconic place in popular
culture.
Can you imagine Peter Fonda and Dennis Hopper in easy rider without their
customized Hollies? How about that scene in born to be wild? Well,
with a Kimco one 25, it just wouldn't have been quite the same
Anyway, who hasn't heard of the King of bike culture.
You don't have to know anything about motorcycles to know what a Holly is.
Although to be fair, if you ask younger people this question,
then the answer may be very different from what we all think you'll soon.
See what I mean?
Despite everything the last six years have been terrifying for Holly Davidson
stakeholders. Over this time, the Milwaukee,
Wisconsin based company has seen its share price plummet by nearly 70%.
We're talking about a company with a straightforward and easy to understand
business. Basically Holly Davidson operates two business areas,
the production and sale of motorcycles and accessories on the one hand,
which accounts for 88% of the company's revenue and the financial division on
the other, that roughly accounts for the remaining 12% of revenue from there,
we can identify its brand has a clear competitive advantage,
and usually its product,
the bikes directed towards customers with higher disposable income,
which in principle represents more strengths.
And as if that weren't enough over the last few years,
this company has quoted a price to profits PP ratio that is
substantially lower than that offered us stock exchange average about 13 times
its profits.
That.
Is we have an uncomplicated business, a valuable brand, a leadership position,
and they've very reasonable people.
Ratio.
During these last six years,
this company should have been squarely on the radar of many investors. However,
as we have already mentioned during this time,
the share price has actually collapsed by 70% for many analysts.
This makes it an example of what is known as a valuation.
So what is a value trap? Let's say.
That in financial slang,
a value trap is a company that seems to trade below its intrinsic value,
but that's, for some reason it is not undervalued, but in fact, the opposite,
therefore becoming a risky investment.
These are usually companies in decline we've structural problems.
Well.
The fact is that this company,
one of the great icons of made in the USA is currently going through one of the
most turbulent and complicated periods in its entire history.
And the obvious question we should ask is what is going on with one of the most
legendary companies in American industry?
What could possibly explain its share price, experiencing such a collapse
Once more right now in the face of the enormous difficulties,
it faces a plan has been put in place to restructure the entire company from top
to bottom. What is this plan? Can it succeed in this video?
We will tell you all about what's happening with the most well-known motorcycle
manufacturer in the world. So let's begin.
The golden age.
Any good success story in the United States.
This one also begins at home though this time, not in a garage.
The first workshop was in the basement of the Davidson family home.
Although soon after the activity was moved to a small shed in the family.
It was there.
In the early 20th century in 1903, to be exact that Milwaukee engineer,
William Holly and his friend Arthur Davidson designed a motorized bike,
a device whose first engine had a leather belt transmission and a total of three
horsepower. Yes, that's what I said. Three horses.
[Inaudible].
You had to put your feet on the ground and push to help the machine move even.
So that's where the great success story began. Gradually.
The company grew and just three years later in 1906, the new company,
and now grated a new workshop of 200 meters square and had six employees.
And from there, well, from there, the takeoff was meteoric
By 1920 Harley Davidson was already the world's largest motorcycle
manufacturer. Largely thanks to the role it played during the world war one.
Throughout this time,
the Milwaukee company manufactured more than 20,000 motorcycles for the U S
army. Over the years,
military conflicts played a key role in the development of this company during
world war II, for example,
Harley Davidson manufactured nearly 90,000 motorcycles for the U S military.
It could be said that this involvement boosted Harley Davidson's image as a 100%
American.
And product.
So after the war,
this company not only maintained its strong position in the North American
market, taking more than 50% of all motorbike sales,
it also became an emblem, an unmistakable icon in American culture.
[Inaudible].
Groups of bikers, war, veterans, and appearances and films such as Terminator,
Robocop, pop fiction, or Rocky among many of us.
And of course it's had its tough years.
[Inaudible].
From European and especially Japanese add Harley Davidson on the ropes in the
1980s in 1982, sales fell just to over 28,000 units.
And the worst was expected.
This was something that had already happened to Holly's well-known rival Indian
motors, which ended up filing for bankruptcies on successive occasions.
And passing from hand to hand,
as manufacturing was constantly interrupted by financial problems. However,
president Reagan's decision to set tariffs on Japanese motorcycle imports,
along with a complete restructuring of the company, changed everything.
And so year after year Harley-Davidson has maintained its top position and the
North American market. Of course,
the problems it is now facing are a little different.
A cold engine.
As we've told you already,
Harley Davidson is going through one of the most complicated periods in its
entire history that their shares have plummeted by 70% in the last six years.
It's no accident. The truth is this old rockstar of the highways.
Hasn't really rocketed.
For many years.
You see in this table that while over the last six years virtually all of its
rivals have seen their motorcycle sales grow from one year to the next Holly
Davidson has seen its motorcycle sales reduce at an average rate of 4% per
year, year after year.
Even if.
We take into account the relatively strong revenues in its financial division,
the result is that corporate sales have been losing ground.
For years.
In fact, in terms of the number of bikes sold sales in 2019,
we're at the lowest levels of the loss.
15 Years.
This in companies,
we have so much operational leverage that require a lot of investment in
capital, such as factories, machines, distribution centers, et cetera. Well,
it is a problem. And, uh.
The serious one, for example.
The return on invested capital in this company in 2019 was 50% lower than the
averages of the previous five years and less than half of what the company
pertained in 2014,
A similar evolution to that's recorded by its net margin that has dropped from
levels of close to 15% to just over half that.
[Inaudible].
It swelled. The company has seen its leveraged levels,
skyrocket the combination of more debt and poorer results brought the debt to
EBI TDA ratio to be above seven.
And now in 2020, especially after the impact of the coronavirus,
the suggestion is that it could be much, much worse.
What's really going on with Harley Davidson.
Why on earth are its bikes having such a hard time?
Isn't it still one of the great American brands at the end of the day? Well,
that's exactly what we want to do. You see,
according to an analysis published in 2019 by the investment bank UBS,
the typical owner of a Holly is a white man married about 50 years old and with
an income of above $90,000 per year,
that is a generational shift is making the younger lose the special attraction
for types of motorcycles that are large, heavy and above all very expensive.
So.
What we have is a buyer with an average age of more than 50 years.
And although the company has sought to reach out to a younger audience,
the truth is that so far, it has really not succeeded.
And that is certainly not a good idea.
As the baby.
The boomer generation ages,
it stands to reason that the potential customer base shrinks.
And besides that we have to add in the increasing competition that comes with
this kind of generational change. For example,
there are the good results obtained by the rival company,
Polaris after relaunching the legendary American brand Indian motorcycle,
a brand that specializes in large motors,
Despite the predictable lows of April and March,
2020 at the time of making this video for thrice of Harley Davidson shares has
just soared to over 75% from the $15 to
$27 27 cents.
And not only that to many analysts have also changed their recommendation on
this company and all this,
all this has a lot to do with a change that occurred in February.
Oh game changer.
After trying many things such as pushing models, focused on a younger audience,
boosting loyalty programs,
betting on developing electric models or seeking to reduce costs with factories
in India. Finally in February, 2020, the company's former CEO,
Matt [inaudible] decided to set up.
Side.
Until that point.
Nothing had worked the position of maximum responsibility and the management of
the company then fell into the hands of someone with a completely different
profile.
Madeline [inaudible] was an engineer with a long history in the industry.
The new person chosen to take charge of Harley Davidson was Joe.
[inaudible] a marketing specialist,
environmental activists and collector of African. Yeah.
Oh.
Evidentially.
A very clear example of how the company wants to change from top to bottom and
from left to right. Completely.
But who exactly is he? Well, to give you an idea,
we're talking about a marketing specialist who started his career in the
personal care multinational Colgate's Palm leaf and who rapidly Rose to fame
and earned his fortune. When at 30, he became the CEO of Puma,
a company that was practically bankrupt at the time, incidentally,
he was the youngest CEO of a publicly traded company in the history of Germany
before long Zeist managed to straighten things out and change the company's
image into a fashion brand links to a sporting lifestyle. For example,
they made an agreement with Madonna,
the queen of pop to wear their trainers during her tours.
When he left the post two decades later, whom his shares had increased 27 fold.
Well.
That's exactly what he intends to do with Harley-Davidson to carry out a
complete corporate revolution that puts the iconic American brand back on top.
[Inaudible].
For example, plans include substantially reducing the number of bike models,
which improves factory productivity and efficiency one hand,
and on the other enables them to focus on the most cost-effective models.
He is.
Harley Davidson will focus exclusively on the 50 geographic markets where the
company is strongest. That is in locations where the numbers don't work a week.
Well, he closed them.
The laying off of 13% of the workforce worldwide,
the suspension of share buyback programs and plans to reduce current expenses
and capital investment have been also.
So far all this together.
With a reinforced commitment to electric motorbikes,
and a new approach to marketing is what this CEO hopes we'll be able to turn
around with a difficult situation that this Milwaukee manufacturer is good.
Three.
Question is,
will Holly Davidson succeed or will it continue to destroy its value on its own
race to the abyss?
Can you make the shares of an American icon take off or are they doomed to
remain a value?
[Inaudible].
Leave your answer in the comments. So I really hope you've enjoyed this video.
Please hit like if you did, and don't forget to subscribe for brand new videos.
Don't forget to check out our friends at the reconsider media podcast.
They provided the vocals in this episode that are not mine. Also.
This channel is possible because of Patrion and our patrons on that platform.
Please consider joining them and supporting our mission of providing independent
political coverage. And as always, I'll be seeing you in the next video.
And if you want to learn more about politics and hear even more of my lovely
voice, you can join us at reconsider media.
We have a podcast@reconsidermedia.com slash podcast. See you there.